176	
NAW 5/26  nr. 3  september 2025	
Heyting Day 2025: Symposium in honour of Jaap van Oosten	
Van den Berg, De Jong
Kleene
It was Kleene who invented realizability 
in response to Brouwer’s work on intuitio­
nism, a particular philosophy of mathema­
tics. In Brouwer’s philosophy every valid 
proof of an existence statement should be 
underpinned by a construction of the thing 
that is claimed to exist. What Brouwer me­
ant by a construction is not easy to say, 
but Kleene decided to read this as an al­
gorithm (a computer program). This made 
use of the, then very new, area of computa­
bility theory, which gave a mathematically 
precise definition of an algorithm and a 
computable function, developed to a large 
extent by Kleene himself. Nowadays we are 
In recognition of his scientific work, Jaap 
was an invited plenary speaker at the Lo­
gic Colloquium (three times) and at the CT 
conference in 2014, the most important 
scientific venues for Mathematical Logic 
and Category Theory in the world.
Scientific work
To understand the context of Jaap’s scien­
tific work, we strongly recommend reading 
his historical essay on realizability, pu­
blished in 2002 [9]. This paper recognises 
three milestones in the development of the 
subject of realizability:
	
х
Kleene’s founding paper from 
1945 called “On the interpretation 
of intuitionistic number theory” 
[4].
	
х
Troelstra’s magnum opus called 
“Metamathematical Investigation 
of Intuitionistic Arithmetic and 
Analysis” from 1973 [7].
	
х
Hyland’s landmark paper called 
“The effective topos” from 1982 [2].
Biography
Jaap was born on 19 December, 1957, in 
Klundert, the Netherlands. In 1976 he 
started his studies at the University of Am­
sterdam; not in mathematics, but in Dutch 
Language and Literature. He switched 
to mathematics in 1981 and finished his 
master in 1986. After that, he did his PhD 
under the supervision of Anne Troelstra 
from 1987–1991, also at the University of 
Amsterdam.
After his PhD, he did postdocs in Par­
ma, Århus, Amsterdam and Utrecht, before 
obtaining a permanent position in Utrecht 
in 2000. During his time as a postdoc, he 
married Tine Blankenstein in 1994.
Throughout his scientific career, Jaap 
wrote many papers on categorical aspects 
of realizability, bringing together computa­
bility and logic.
This culminated in his book “Realizabili­
ty: an Introduction to its Categorical Side”, 
published in 2008 [10]. It has become the 
standard reference for the treatment of re­
alizability from a categorical perspective.
Evenement  Event
Heyting Day 2025: Models of 
intuitionism and computability
Symposium in honour of Jaap van Oosten
In December of 2024 Jaap van Oosten retired from the University of Utrecht. At the Heyting 
Day 2025, which was held on 14 March 2025 at the KNAW and organised by the authors to­
gether with Albert Visser, we celebrated his many contribution to research and teaching. 
The meeting was entitled “Models of intuitionism and computability” and consisted of 
three talks by international experts and the Heyting Lecture held by Jaap van Oosten. The 
meeting was attended by about 100 people and the recordings of the talks can be found 
on the website of the KNAW11 and YouTube12. In this article we give an overview of Jaap’s 
life, his scientific work and his other contributions to academic life.
Benno van den Berg
Institute for Logic, Language and Computation
University of Amsterdam
b.vandenberg3@uva.nl
Tom de Jong
Functional Programming Lab
University of Nottingham
tom.dejong@nottingham.ac.uk

Van den Berg, De Jong	
Heyting Day 2025: Symposium in honour of Jaap van Oosten	
NAW 5/26  nr. 3  september 2025	 177
Grayson [1] did important work.
Jaap’s PhD thesis [8] should be under­
stood against this background. It contri­
butes to the semantic understanding of 
various notions of realizability, in the foot­
steps of the works just mentioned, and fo­
cusing on Lifschitz realizability in particu­
lar. Jaap’s PhD thesis contains many more 
things, some of which he would further de­
velop in later work. All of this goes under 
the rather understated title of Exercises in 
Realizability.
After his PhD thesis, he analysed, 
among other things, relative, modified 
and extensional realizability, always using 
topos theory as his general framework for 
effective topos is the prime example. This 
is a world which is ruled by realizability in 
that in this world everything is computable 
by nature: it is truly a computable universe.
Jaap’s work
 It turns out that many of the other realiza­
bility interpretations that can be found in 
Troelstra’s book can also be understood as 
being the logical laws in suitable compu­
table universes. Trying to formulate these 
proof-theoretic interpretations in a more 
semantic way, using the notions of topos 
and tripos in particular, has proven to be 
an incredibly fruitful endeavour. Pitts star­
ted doing this in his PhD thesis [6] and also 
very familiar with this concept and we can 
say: a function is computable if it can be 
computed by an (idealised) computer (with 
unbounded memory).
Kleene’s realizability can be under­
stood as a mathematical answer to the 
question: if you give a constructive proof, 
what is the implicit algorithm that is hid­
den in the proof? One of the things realiza­
bility allows you to prove is the following: 
if you prove 
( , )
x
y
x y
N
N
6
7
!
!
{
 and your 
proof is constructive, then you can obtain 
an algorithm that finds a suitable y as a 
function of x.
Troelstra
After Kleene’s work, it became clear that 
the way he extracted an algorithm from a 
constructive proof was not the only one and 
many more “realizability interpretations” 
were found. All of these were collected 
and systematically explained in Troelstra’s 
magnum opus from 1973. As Jaap empha­
sises in his book, this systematisation in­
volved a lot of original work, so Troelstra’s 
book should be seen as much more than 
an exposition of known material.
Hyland
In Troelstra’s book realizability is always a 
proof-theoretic interpretation, a syntactic 
transformation 
of 
logical 
formulas 
preserving their constructive provability. 
However, Martin Hyland’s work on the 
effective topos, and his work on tripos 
theory together with Johnstone and Pitts 
[3], started a different semantic tradition. 
This semantic tradition is crucial for 
understanding Jaap’s work.
In this tradition we understand realiza­
bility as a mathematical structure which 
is interesting in its own right, irrespective 
of own’s philosophical convictions. The 
question, of course, is what kind of struc­
ture realizability should be, and the ans­
wer given by Hyland is that it is a topos, or 
more precisely: an elementary topos. Ele­
mentary toposes were defined by Lawvere 
and Tierney in 1969–1970 and axiomatise 
a categorical object that acts as a world 
of sets and functions. The main class of 
examples at the time were the so-called 
Grothendieck toposes, as invented by Al­
exandre Grothendieck for the purposes of 
algebraic geometry.
The triposes defined by Hyland, Johnstone 
and Pitts allowed one to construct a new 
class of elementary toposes, and Hyland’s 
14 MARCH 2025
Symposium in honour of Jaap van Oosten
Location
Info & Registration
Attendance is free
Trippenhuis, Kloveniersburgwal 29, Amsterdam
https://www.knaw.nl/en/heyting‐day‐2025
Jaap van Oosten
UTRECHT UNIVERSITY
Sebastiaan Terwijn
RADBOUD UNIVERSITY
Andrej Bauer 
UNIVERSITY OF LJUBLJANA
Andy Pitts
UNIVERSITY OF CAMBRIDGE
Models of
        Intuitionism and
                Computability
HEYTING DAY 2025
Poster of the Heyting Day 2025
Courtesy of Jacob Neumann

178	
NAW 5/26  nr. 3  september 2025	
Heyting Day 2025: Symposium in honour of Jaap van Oosten	
Van den Berg, De Jong
One special quality of Jaap is that he 
wanted students in logic to become 
acquainted with the full breadth of 
mathematical logic. In particular, he would 
often run student seminars on topics 
like the topology of rewrite systems or 
o-minimality, which were quite far from his 
own area of expertise.
Both authors have very fond memories 
of Jaap’s lecture notes on Recursion Theory 
and Nonstandard models of Peano Arith­
metic. Also his lecture notes on Category 
Theory & Topos Theory have become a re­
ference for many generations of students. 
Characteristic of these notes is that they 
are always very to the point, stimulating, 
but also expect the student to do a serious 
amount of work.
In short, Jaap has made considerable 
contributions to mathematical logic in the 
Netherlands and the Dutch logic communi­
ty is indebted to him for his many efforts on 
its behalf.	
	
←
He has also been crucial in keeping mathe­
matical logic alive in the Mathematics De­
partment in Utrecht. The course on “Grond­
slagen van de Wiskunde” (Foundations of 
Mathematics) has been the first introducti­
on to logic for a whole generation of math 
students in Utrecht. The lecture notes for 
this course have become Jaap’s second 
book Sets, Models and Proofs [5] (publis­
hed in 2018, and written together with Ieke 
Moerdijk).
Indeed, if you look at the names of 
Jaap’s PhD, MSc or BSc students, it beco­
mes a “who is who” for Dutch mathema­
tical logic. His PhD students were Pieter 
Hofstra, Wouter Stekelenburg and Jetze 
Zoethout; and we would also like to menti­
on Bram Arens and Claire Gentil, who both 
started, but did not finish for personal re­
asons.
Among the many master students Jaap 
supervised (certainly more than 40), we 
would like to mention Eric Faber, Sori Lee, 
Niels Voorneveld and Tingxiang Zou in parti­
cular, as their work led to joint publications.
trying to understand the phenomena he 
observed. He also contributed to the un­
derstanding of the morphisms of these 
realizability toposes and the ways realiza­
bility toposes can be obtained from com­
putational models known as pcas and their 
various generalisations. Much of this work 
was done together with his MSc and PhD 
students.
Teaching
Jaap was also passionate about teaching 
and raising the next generation of Dutch 
logicians.
We already mentioned his book Reali­
zability: an Introduction to its Categorical 
Side. The book starts by quoting Martin Hy­
land saying that the world is not ready for 
a book on realizability; nevertheless, Jaap 
decided to write one and explicitly says the 
main motivation for writing this book was 
to help MSc and PhD students who wan­
ted to find their way into this subject, and 
as such it has been enormously helpful to 
many students.
1	
R. J. Grayson. Modified realisability toposes. 
Handwritten notes from Münster University, 
1981.
2	
J. M. E. Hyland. The effective topos. In A. S. 
Troelstra and D. van Dalen, editors, The L. E. 
J. Brouwer Centenary Symposium, volume 
110 of Studies in Logic and the Foundations 
of Mathematics, pages 165–216. Elsevier, 
1982.
3	
J. M. E. Hyland, P. T. Johnstone, and A. M. Pit­
ts. Tripos theory. Mathematical Proceedings 
of the Cambridge Philosophical Society, 
88(2):205–232, 1980.
4	
S. C. Kleene. On the interpretation of intu- 
itionistic number theory. Journal of Symbo­
lic Logic, 10(4):109–124, 1945.
5	
I. Moerdijk and J. van Oosten. Sets, Models 
and Proofs. Springer Undergraduate Mathe­
matics Series. Springer, 2018.
6	
A. M. Pitts. The Theory of Triposes. PhD the­
sis, University of Cambridge, 1981.
7	
A. S. Troelstra. Metamathematical Investiga­
tion of Intuitionistic Arithmetic and Analysis, 
volume 344 of Lecture Notes in Mathema­
tics. Springer-Verlag, 1973.
8	
J. van Oosten. Exercises in realizability. PhD 
thesis, University of Amsterdam, 1991.
9	
J. van Oosten. Realizability: a historical es­
say. Mathematical Structures in Computer 
Science, 12(3), 239–263, 2002.
10	 J. van Oosten. Realizability: An Introduc- 
tion to its Categorical Side, volume 152 of 
Studies in Logic and the Foundations of Ma­
thematics. Elsevier, 2008.
11	 https://www.knaw.nl/en/heyting-day-2025
12	 https://www.youtube.com/@DeKNAW/vi­
deos
References and notes
