[Music]
Okay,
everybody, welcome to uh this year's
heighting day. Uh the event today is
organized in honor of uh Yapan O's
retirement. So you usually the heighting
day is dedicated to 50 years or 100
years of uh the anniversary of an
important paper in logic. So uh in 2019
it was Fragus the Aadanka and in 2022 it
was
Vitsteinatus. So this year we uh diverge
from this pattern. So well everybody
knows that L lutter or go or B or
Margaret
said the consequence
to so uh but on the other hand maybe we
can we can construct a connection with a
great paper namely Ken's great paper the
interpretation of intuitionistic number
theory of 1945.
Okay, that's 80 years and not 50 or 100,
but it's still a worthy
number. Okay, so now after two
philosophical hiding days, so this is a
more logic logic day. So the real stuff.
So uh even
even if there's still a philosophical
component. So these lecture today's
lectures as everybody has seen are uh
center on themes in Yab's work. So first
we will have Andy Pittz and he will tell
us a extremely gripping story
namely how a puzzle concerning the truth
value object of higher order
intuitionistic logic led to a completely
surprising discovery in intuitionistic
propositional logic. Then Andre Bower
will explain to us about the uh
effective topos. So that's the world in
which computability is built in into the
very fabric of the universe. And uh he
will explain that this topos is indeed a
good place to uh do recursion theory.
Uh yeah. So, so that seems to be
completely self-evident. Of course, you
designed it for it and then it does what
it is supposed to does. But my
experience is that most of the time that
isn't true. So, uh so uh so uh yeah, so
it's it it we are going to hear good
news from
Andre. So then then we have Bast who
will uh explain the effective topos. So
that's sorry that's not right.
who will explain partial combinatory
algebbras. So they are the fundamental
objects that also play an important role
in the construction of toposes. And then
of course yapan o. Yeah. So in Dutch we
have the word faced far and uh but but
it's a translatable. It would be the the
festive pig but that's that doesn't feel
right. uh uh he will give this year's
hating lecture and he will explain to us
how the information flow is not just
from categories to logic but also uh in
the other direction. So you will hear
more about Yap's work uh uh uh and and
about Yap himself uh in Beno's
introduction uh to YAP. Okay, before
giving the floor to the first speaker, I
I want to share some heighting news with
you. That's surprising. Most of the
years we do not have specific heighting
news, but this year we have in 55. It
turns out that uh uh before he uh
published his famous book intuitionism
and introduction, he wrote an article in
French leiut philosophic. So that's
about uh uh intuitionistic logic
explained to philosophers and it has the
title la conception intuitionist de
loic. So that paper
uh starts with the opposition between lo
and
loav and so uh their intuitionistic
logic is presented as the logic of
knowing. So that's interesting because
it differs really from what Heiding is
saying later in in his his famous book.
And so the news is that a group of four
logicians Philip Albiani, Dick Dong, and
Hans Fondetmar and Yangying Wang are
preparing a translation of this French
paper in in English and in Chinese. And
very soon this will be out. So ta stay
tuned stay tuned to see that uh that uh
translation come out. Okay, that's all I
wanted to say. And so now without
further ado, we move to the first
lecture which will be chaired by Rosie.
Thank you. So it's my great pleasure to
introduce our first speaker, Andrew
Pittz. Now, I don't think he needs an
introduction, but I'm going to give it
anyway because I like that. So, uh yes,
I know,
but I'm in
charge. No. So, uh Andrew Pittz started
out as a PhD student under Peter Johnson
to work on, uh the applications of
category theory in logic and the
foundations of mathematics. And then
later with a shift of departments in the
late
1980s he um uh started to work again on
c applications of category theory but
then in the field of um the semantics of
programing in languages and as someone
puts it very nicely I read it somewhere
that he changed from being surrounded by
mathematicians to being surrounded by
computer
scientists and with a wealth of
publications supervision of PhD students
and other students. He has been a great
is and has been a great influence in the
field. But I want to take the
opportunity to also on a personal note
say something because uh Albert alluded
to that already that in
1992 pitch published a paper that he's
also going to talk about
uh and something happened that sometimes
happens in research and that is that
this paper besides the expected impact
on the field where it was meant for also
So suddenly uh it occurred that it had
consequences in other fields in logic
and uh in fact many people in the
Netherlands have worked on this property
that so to say emerged from this
paper and for many years and also very
recently in the last years uh some
colleagues who are present here and I
have worked on the development of a
certain yeah technique improve theory
where pitch paper was really
instrumental. So, I'm very grateful for
that. And with this word of uh personal
thanks, I want to give the floor to you.
Thank you. Very good. Oh, thank you very
much. I'm just going to before I start
do a sound check. So, if I stand around
here, are you you're hearing me? Okay. I
I know there's one member of the
audience who can hear me because of
this, but but okay. So, I'll try not to
wander too much, but if I do, shout at
me. Okay. So um well first of all thank
you very much uh to Albert and Beno for
first of all giving me the opportunity
to be in this place this august uh
institution that I've not been in
before. So it's fascinating uh to to be
here uh and uh to speak at a a heighting
day is is a great honor for me because
um heighting in one way or another um
has been quite an influence uh on things
I've done. Um uh
uh I don't know whether it's true. Did
Brower say that he thought that
Heiting's formalization was sterile? Um
well, I'm a kind of person who likes
syntax and rules and and formalism. So
my grip on intuitionism is very much
coming uh from the point of view of
formal systems rather than any
philosophical um um point of view.
And um the thesis of this talk is not a
very controversial one. The thesis is
that uh um if we're going to study
models of intuitionism and
computability, so that's the subtitle of
of this day as it were. Uh then um the
mathematical theory of categories is a
crucial technological tool for for doing
that. So um
uh you know that's uh we'll we'll see a
bit of that in this talk, but it's sort
of evident in in the title of Yab's uh
book. for example on realizability which
has the word categorical in it. Uh and I
must say it's it's very nice to be here
to to um
celebrate this young
man not so young man and his career.
Yes. So um what I I am uh aiming to do
uh so I I want to sort of basically make
some observations about the role of
category theory in logic and and also
the influence of logic on category
theory. Um and the other thing I want to
do is uh as Rosalie um intimated is that
um I want to recall for you uh uh what's
a an open problem to do with um higher
order intuitionistic logic and and um
and the bit of category theory that has
to do with things called
toposes.
Uh I haven't actually I was thinking
about this. It's it's funny. Uh since
doing uh the work I'll tell you a little
bit about of in the middle of this talk
which was sort of in the early 90s. I
don't think I've actually in fact ever
given a talk since then um about this
particular topic. So it's it's uh quite
a pleasure to be able to do that. But I
do have a an ulterior motive which is
that um I really would like to have the
open question that I'll tell you about
settled. I don't think at the moment we
know what the answer to it is. It's
maybe not the world's most important
question, but it's kind of embarrassing
that we don't know what the answer is.
And I'm sort of hoping that uh some
young person in the audience will will
either come to me at the end of the talk
and say, "Surely it's just x y and zed."
Um or at least go away and solve it very
quickly because I think it's probably
quite solvable. It's just that that I
and a few other people have managed to
actually do that. Uh the other thing
I'll aim to do is to I was told not to
be too technical. So I'm not going to be
too technical in this talk and I I so I
apologize to the people I can see in the
audience who know far more about most of
the things that I'm talking about. Uh
but I've learned over the years that you
can never be too simple that that even
you know you gratify the people who
think that they know what what what the
stuff is anyway and the people who don't
appreciate uh not being told things that
they don't understand too much. Of
course my idea of what being not too
technical is might not correspond to
yours but we'll we'll see. Um so let's
begin at the beginning. Right. So I I
can't as it were really um I'm not going
to to assume that you know very much
category theory and I'm not really going
to even tell you what it is but we
should have some at least some attempt
to say what kind of thing it is. And and
maybe you know a good way of thinking
about it is in terms of what the bathe
mathematician in the street uh would use
in the way of foundations or or language
when describing structures that they
were interested in studying. and they
would probably use some sort of set
theoretic language. So a mathematical
structure of some kind would be
described in terms of what kind of
elements it has and the relations and
the functions between the elements that
that are relevant to that kind of
structure. So, so category theory uh
approaches mathematical structures in in
a apparently quite abstract way that the
only way that you can really talk about
a structure is by by saying things about
how structures transform between
themselves. So, category theorists call
the transformations morphisms rather
than
transformations. Um and uh to know a
structure you have to know what kind of
morphisms uh go into that structure or
what come out of them and how the the
morphisms compose and at base that's the
only means of expression that you have
in terms of of of of those simple uh
concepts. So it seems on the face of it
that you wouldn't be able to really say
anything very much or very interesting
at at that level level of abstraction.
But it turns out as as we know that that
category theory is uh um uh amazingly
expressive in in in in some ways
starting with that that base language
which is transform theoretic rather than
element theoretic as it
were and I I'm going to look at two
places where it's been uh uh useful uh
to take that kind of category theoretic
point of view. So one is the use of of
the cate theoretic notion of a junction
uh in proof theory and the other will be
uh to look at particular uh sorts of
categories called tocoses in relation to
models of intuitionistic higher order
logic. So let let's start with with um
adjunctions and and and prove theory. So
uh adjointness and adjunctions uh I
think I'm right in saying that the
original paper on category theory so by
Mlan 1945 I guess it appeared didn't
mention the notion of adjint if I
remember correctly I think it's probably
its first appearance in print was 10 or
so years later Daniel K had a paper in
1958 about adjunctions but um roll on to
now and and I think most People would
agree that the notion of a junction is
the key concept in category theory. So
the notion of category and funer and
natural transformation exists so that
you can explain what an adjunction is uh
because they occur everywhere and uh and
explain lots of disperate different
apparently different things in terms of
the of this single notion. So again, I I
I I'm not going to attempt to define
what an adjunction is in generality, but
I thought at least we could see the the
definition in the simple special case
where we're just looking at categories
which have at most one um morphism
between any two things. So so partially
ordered sets. So if I if I have a uh two
post sets P and Q and a monotone so an
order preserving function between them
okay then I I would say that um oops
um I'm getting my buttons mixed up now
we are so I'd say that that um if you've
got some element of of the second post Q
that that the monotone function uh has a
right adjint at that element Y if you
can find some element back in P. So
let's call it G of Y. Okay, with this
this property so that f ofx is less than
or equal in Q to Y if and only if X is
less than or equal to this element G
Y. Okay. So if that happens for for all
uh for all X, then I'd say that that
this element gy was the value of the
right adjint to the monotone function f
uh at Y. And if that exists for every y
then we say that f has has a writer
joint. So some function g going back
from q to p. And um this property here
uniquely determines g of y for a given
y. And so if you've got one for each y
then you get a uniquely determined
function uh extens uh uh extensionally.
Uh so the right adjint if it exists is
is is uniquely determined by f and it's
again a monotone
function. That's a right adjint. So why
why write because um uh you see that f
appears on the left of the left and less
than or equal and g on the right of it.
So g is the right adjint to f and the
dual concept of a left joint would be
where you just use opposite uh for
orderings. Okay. So it's a just duly you
can have left a
joint. So
um Bill Lvier and Jim Lambbeck uh sadly
neither of them still with us uh I guess
in the late 60s and early 70s observed
that very many logical constructs can
actually be characterized by being
either left or right adjoin to some
other uh construct that you already
have. you usually maybe with some extra
condition. I'm going to in most of this
talk gloss over that aspect but you want
sort of the adjoint to not it just
exists but to be stable under various
kinds of substitution for it to to work
out properly. But the point is that um
uh and what's good about this adjoint
characterization of logical constructs
is is this uniqueness aspect. If you
know that a construct is characterized
as an adjoin then you know that there's
that it's uniquely determined. Okay. So,
so if you're in some kind of of logic
and you're looking for a a duda that you
know is supposed to be a right adjint to
something, then there's only going to
be, you know, it either exists or it
doesn't. It's there won't be two
different choices of such a thing. And
that's a um philosophically and
practically quite a useful uh thing to
know. And um you know, the prime
non-example of that would be um most
modal operators are not characterizable
as our joints. So that I at least to my
mind gives modal logic a somewhat why it
feels different to
me say somewhat distasteful to me even
if you were to press me. Um but but but
um I don't really mean that of course
but uh uh but it but that that is a good
an important example of something that
doesn't fall in into this this orbit.
But many basic logical constructs are
are characterizable maybe maybe a
surprisingly large uh number of them and
and this was the observation that that
that these guys made back then. So one
example right I mean if you if we take
the notion of universal quantification
right in various different situations
but let's look at it in height's
intuitionistic predicate logic okay so
one way of characterizing what the
universal oops uh quantifier is right is
that that so suppose I've got two
formulas in intuutionistic predicate
logic and the left hand one doesn't
involve the variable x okay and so I'll
use a turntile star symbol for for
entailment in in this logic. So if pi
entails s okay and um uh it's the case
that that um this thing doesn't involve
x then it's going to be the case that pi
entails for all xi and vice versa. So we
we get this this um if and only if
characterization of of
um of universal quantification. So this
is an example of an adjunction right. So
what's what's the f what's the monotone
function? It's kind of invisible, right?
So so in this case it's just the
weakening operation. So if you take all
the formulas in some variables y um
quotient by by intuitionistic
entailment, those are included in all
the formulas in y and an extra variable
x. Uh and that's what so on the that's f
is being applied there. That weakening
function is being applied to this
formula. It's just that uh it's a no op
as it was as far as the notation goes.
So you don't see the F on that side. And
the G is this for all X that is
restricting formulas to to things that
don't don't involve X. And G is on the
right of the turn style and F is on the
left of the turn style. And you've got
this if and only if. And then monotone
uh weakening is obviously monotone for
entailment. And so we get for all
cropping up as an instance of a right
joint in this case to to the to the
weakening
operation. Okay. So let's look at that
now not in in um predicate logic where
where these fs and size are formulas
built up from the usual propositional
connectives and uh quantifiers okay but
let's look at that now uh uh in the case
of um of propositional logic okay so now
I want to um uh take formulas which are
are built up from um variables that
stand for unknown propositions things of
of sort omega as I as I'll say later,
okay, using just true and false and
conjunction and disjunction and
implication, but there are no
quantifiers or anything like that. Okay,
so they're just first order
propositional formula uh in the usual
log logical connectives and I'm I'm
looking at the modulo um entailment in
intuitionistic logic.
Okay. So, um, we could ask, um, you
know, if I've got an entailment like
this, so phi implies pi where where phi
involves some some variables q and s
involves the same things and one other
extra thing p. Could I find a formula to
replace uh the question mark by um so
that you get an if and only if like
this it I would say in you know up until
1991 the answer if you'd asked anybody
that they would say no of course not I
mean you know it's entirely unlikely
because you have very limited means of
expression you've just you know the
formulas have to be built up
propositionally right there are no
quantifiers or anything so how on earth
could it be that you could have
something like that. So the surprising
thing was uh that the the do exist first
order uh propositional formula. So I'll
call them uh a subp for for all and
there's a dual e subp for for exist. So
that would be the left a joint to
weakening. The a subp would be giving
the right a joint. But the A is there is
a formula that fills in the question
mark for all possible choices of S and
and and P and and the extra variables Q
that makes the this um uh this this true
and I would emphasize this thing is is
constructed from the variables using
true and false and and or implies but
nothing else. So that's um
uh quite a surprising fact actually. uh
why why is it surprising? Well, first of
all, if you think if we were doing
classical logic, so so boolean logic not
not heighting logic. Okay, then uh it's
not this is not a a very tricky problem.
That's because in classical logic, you
know, uh
uh a variable P can't be, you know, you
can't tell P from uh P equals true or P
equals false. Now that the formula P if
and only if true or P if and only if
false is is is the same thing as P up to
provability. So so everything internally
is either true or false. And so we can
get the quantifiers just by taking our
formula p and and substituting for for
the um variable p first true and then
false and taking the disjunction and
that would give us something which
classically fits the the um in here and
for the exist would be the same thing
but with a conjunction. So in classical
logic certainly these things exist but
intuitionistic logic is far more
complicated than than than classical
logic. I mean we don't know um I would
say in general a huge amount about what
this thing looks like as as an algebra
or as as a as a a latis the formulas of
of first order formulas in propositional
logic modulo intuitionistic provability
I mean what do we do know we know that
you know up to entailment there are
infinitely many different formula uh uh
um as long as you've got at least one
variable around and for two or
variables, we don't have a very great
hold over what the explicit structure of
of the latis of of formula modulo
provability is. And in particular, right
here, we're asking with this if and only
if um there are going to be infinitely
many uh different Q. If I if I just go
back a slide here, we're asking with
this property here.
Um, this a subp has got to be the
biggest thing, right? The biggest thing
with the property that it doesn't
involve the letter P and is entailed by
Q. So there will be infinitely many
different formula in general that that
um that are don't involve the letter P
and and lie above Q in the entailment
relation. And
um you know we uh the biggest one would
be like the disjunction of all of them
but that that's an infinite disjunction.
So that's not going to be a formula in
the logic anymore. So, it's not at all
clear uh why
um why these things should exist, but
they do. They do. Um I proved it um
uh using uh proof theory. Um and it's
actually quite a good um sort of
substory about how that happened.
Um you'll see in a moment why I was
trying to prove this. I I wasn't
particularly interested in proving this
result. I was interested in disproving
it. I'll tell you why in a moment. And I
I tried to disprove it. I tried to come
up with a particular first order
propositional formula that for which the
a subp doesn't exist. Okay. and uh
couldn't and uh um it was only later
probably about 1991 or something I was
sitting in a seminar that that the late
Roy Deoff was giving where he was um
telling me and the audience about a
particular presentation of um Gensson
sequence calculus for uh initialistic
logic where you expand the number of
rules for implication so that you get a
presentation of the sequent calculus
with the pretty property that that
there's a a wellfounded measure of size
on the on the sequence which goes
strictly down from conclusion to
hypothesis
uh which is isn't the case for for the
usual presentation. So this is this is
something that Roy Deoff um discovered
independently. Huddle discovered it but
it turns out both of them had uh you
know were were inner ear of the um
Russian proof theory school of of some
decades before. So, so uh uh but just
they didn't know about it but Borf have
had basically the same system. So it's a
very nice presentation of of of um
sequence calculus for for intuitionistic
propositional logic. So immediately
shows you that the thing's decidable
because uh you can't grow your proof
trees up more than finitely because of
this wellfounded ordering. But the cool
cool thing for me was that I I I
realized actually during the seminar it
suddenly struck me uh that probably the
work I'd done on on on trying to work
out what on earth these things could be
with a view to seeing that they couldn't
be uh actually could be proved to exist
by by doing a kind of rather boring um
enumeration of possibilities using this
proof system to to make sure that the
algorithm terminates. So there is indeed
a a you know a constructive proof of the
existence of these things. So that
they're computable. If you give me a
formula in uh in propositional logic, we
can compute its a subp as it were. Um at
least in principle we can. So I just
flash up what what the algorithm looks
like. It's pretty disgusting. And yeah,
I mean don't even sort of look at it.
But I I just it's basically one what one
is going through is that you're you're
looking at the sequence. you're looking
at the formulas in them and you're uh
depending on their structure throwing in
instances of the thing that you're
constructing uh at previous stages and
you're doing this using the wellfounded
ordering on on the on the multis sets of
formula. So, so you know that the
process is eventually going to terminate
and the thing that you're interested in
then comes out basically the the the A
is a big but finite disjunction of
things you've already constructed and
the E is a big but finite uh disjun uh
con conjunction of of
things. So um there's actually been some
recent work by Sam Vanul and
uh Fere um so they they uh they've
improved the algorithm. Uh I mean it's
still pro I don't know what the
complexity of the algorithm is. I'm sure
it's super bad um in general, but they
they've um they've done some work um
oops kind of optimizing it uh a bit and
also um checking that I was right which
is always reassuring. So they formalized
the the algorithm and and the proof of
correctness. I think if I remember I
think they did it in um but uh but
it's good it's really good to to to have
that and in the process of doing that
all this the sort of working with
theorem proving systems it's not just
checking that the thing that you thought
was true is true you generally in the
process of formalization come up with
better things as well and they've
certainly come up with a better
algorithm but another very interesting
development that took place a few years
after I published that results as about
95 or so is that um I mean in a sense
you don't get a feel really for it's
just that this process happens to work
and it's kind of amazing that it does
but you don't come out of that knowing
why it works really whereas um uh uh
Sylvia Galardi and and the late Mar
Zavadoski they produced a model
theoretic proof so it's not a
constructive proof so that's bad but but
but it's it gives you um you know
through infinary means a deeper insight
I think into into what's going on uh
with this this result. So they they um
they prove this theorem about the
existence of these formula basically
using a duality between so that I'll
come back to heighting algebbras in in
in a moment but heighting algebra is
sort of the algebraic version of of
intuitionistic propositional logic and
they developed a duality between
heighting algebbras and certain kinds of
sheav with a kind of game theoretic
structure attached to them and we're
able to use that to get a model
theoretic proof of of uh of of this uh
of this result. A bit later uh San
Vangul and Reio have a I think a
slightly cleaner uh version. So they use
the known duality between heighting
algebbras and certain uh ordered
topological spaces that are called
asakia spaces now and the duality is
these days called asakia duality. uh and
it's probably slightly um um uh kind of
um oversimplifying things but roughly
speaking why my result is true is
because if you start with a with a a an
extension of heighting algebra so a
morphism of heighting algebra is where
you can see that the top thing is
finitely presented over over the bottom
thing and you flip it over the isakia
duality you can show that that actually
becomes an open continuous map and so
the existence of the left and right
adjints then follows from from the
openness. Uh so that's I think is sort
of the the most conceptual way of of of
seeing it. I mean of course it doesn't
explain as it were why it happens. It's
just a marvelous thing that it does
happen and you still have to do some
work uh even if you're working with this
duality theory in order to to to see
that that it works.
um another way of of of um thinking
about this is in terms of of
interpolation. So I mention that because
it sort of um turned out to be uh
probably you know in some ways the
better way of thinking about it. So you
probably know you know Craig
interpolation if we were looking at the
Craig interpolation theorem for this
intuitionistic propositional logic it
would say that you know if you've got
one formula entailing another and the
first one involves some variables and
this involves some other variables and
there's a variable in common then Craig
interpolation says that we can find a
formula that just involves the common
variable that sits between the two uh
with the intelment relation okay so
that's that's a you know an old theory
theorem that's true in many systems
certainly true in in this kind of of
logic. So you can see that that
um the result that I proved is actually
showing you that amongst all the
possible interpolence that you have
there's actually a smallest one which is
given by existential quantification
interpreted in intuitionistic
proposition and a biggest one given by
this uh interpretation of universal. So
uh not I but others attached the name
uniform interpolation to this property
of having least and greatest
interpolence. And um since uh 1992 many
people obly among them have looked at
whether this uniform interpolation holds
in in other kinds of of logic. You could
say that many modal logics do satisfy
univer uniform interpolation but but
some don't. I mean so S4 for example uh
uh Galardian Zodosski in 95 they proved
that S4 doesn't have this property. So
some do some don't.
Okay. Well back in n in the early
90s I certainly hope that intuitionistic
propositional logic didn't have the
uniform interpolation property as it's
now called. Okay. And I want to spend
the rest of of of this lecture
explaining to you uh why it was that I
thought you why it would have served my
purpose to show that this this property
does not hold of
IPL. So to do so we're going to talk
about toposes and models of
intuitionistic higher order logic. Okay.
So let's first of all let me just say
what I mean by intuitionistic higher
order logic. Okay. So now we're going to
do not not first order predicate
calculus. We're not going to do
propositional logic. We're going to do
the higher order version of of predicate
calculus. Okay. So um we'll have
variables. Each variable will have a
flavor a sort. Okay. And in first order
logic you might just have some basic
sorts like your variables might be
ranging over things that you thought
were numbers or something like that. So
in higher order logic we we actually
have a structure on the sorts as well as
some ground sorts we have. um so are
formulated in terms of being able to
take the power sort of of of a of a
finite sequence of sorts. So you should
think of a variable of this sort as
somehow denoting something which is
going to be a subset of the cartesian
product of the uh things denoted by by
x1 through
xn. So we have that structure on sorts
and then um for formulas we can just
very simply just use implication and
universal quantification over over v
sorted variables. Okay, built up
formulas built up using those two
constructs just from atomic formulas
that are asserting membership relations.
So our atomic says that you know that
this sequence of variables which has
sorts x1 through xn belongs to to the
variable that denotes an element of this
power sort p of x1 through xn. So those
are the atomic formula and then we'll
build up implications and universal
quantifications and you know rather
marvelously but somewhat impredatively
uh you don't need to put in uh true or
false or and or or if and only if or
exist or even equality. Those are all
definable uh from implication and for
all uh uh starting with membership in in
this in this higher order
logic. Uh I mean of course you do have
to have something that says something
about power sorts. So we'd have a um say
a comprehension axiom that's asserting
the existence of of uh elements of power
sorts for for for you know comprehending
on some formula fi uh and looking at all
those things.
Um so so y collects together those those
things uh x's that satisfy the formula
fine. And of course if you've got a
grand sort with say trying to do natural
numbers or something you'd throw in some
some axioms for that some infinity
axioms but it um it's a very simple but
expressive system right and I I
purposely I there are different ways you
can formulate higher order logic and
I've chosen the one that's furthest away
from the category theoretic uh modeling.
Okay. So, so on the category theoretic
side, we now know, you know, through
decades of of interesting work that
there's a very close correspondence
between um models of that kind of
intuitionistic higher order logic and
certain kinds of of category. So again,
I can't really give you the precise
definition, but I kind of sketch what it
is. So we a category consists of objects
and morphisms and you can compose the
morphisms together and you have
identities and then you can express
various adjintess conditions using those
those means of expression. So a topos is
a category where where you have things
called finite limits and you have power
objects. So the finite limits are just
adoid characterizations of things like
cartesian product functions being
injective um inverse image of a subset
along a function. So these are all
things that are expressed in terms of
so-called finite limits and and are
indeed things that are characterized by
by um by being adjoint to various things
that you already have. And then uh a
little bit more especially we have power
objects. So again I won't give you the
definition but it's roughly speaking an
adjoint characterization of the notion
of power set and comprehension uh and um
in terms of a of a an adjointness
property. So it's also a very um simple
uh notion uh at base uh somewhat
different looking from from um from what
we had uh here. Okay. But but obviously
there's some connection because of the
power power objects will obviously be to
do with um interpreting power source but
but where do we get the interpretation
of implication and for all and things
like that? Well, it turns out that the
combination of these two things give you
a lot more than you you you thought you
might have
had. So, um the history of this is uh
you know the prehistory is sort of from
the second world war up until the
mid70s. the the work on using various
kinds of sheath theory in order to get
results in algebraic topology, algebraic
geometry, number theory, uh you know,
culminating in in oops in Alexander
Growth's notion of a what we would now
call a growth and topoff. So it's a
sheet set value sheaves on a very
generalized notion of a topological
space.
in the uh sort of second half of the 70s
uh Bill Levier and Miles Tierney and
many other people as well uh realized
that you could give a um you know an
elementary in the sense of a finite kind
of essentially algebraic description of
of categories that that uh uh you know
uh should be called toposes. So that
groven's toposes are examples but rather
special uh ones that have some good but
inflammatory properties and the
definition here I've given you of topos
is really I should have said elementary
topos because that's that's what I'm
defining and the it's these guys who
discovered the connection with
intuitionistic logic and higher order
logic and other things besides then at
the end of the 70s um uh Martin
Highlander I should say by the way that
he he was also my PhD supervisor as well
as Peter Johnson. So I I I I had much
richness in the sense of having two
supervisors. Don't know how that works
out exactly but lucky me. Um uh so
Martin um was you know building on
previous work by Kryle and by his
supervisor Robin Gandhi and came up with
the notion of of uh realizability
toposes which was at the time extremely
surprising because um whilst it's the
case that that we had examples of
elementary toposes that weren't growth
league toposes they
were you know kind of not terribly
interesting. Well, I don't know. I mean,
that's probably not right to say, but
but uh the thing is that realizability
toposes are definitely elementary
toposes that are not of the kind that
that growth and dee was was using.
They're not growth and toposes and uh uh
and connected to to computability
through various notions of of
realizability expressed in terms of
commentary algebra. So, these are all
things that in the talks in the rest of
this day that we're going to hear far
more about. So I'm not going to say any
more about them here really except that
um I want to just
uh give you a flavor of what the range
of these kind of different toposes is
like just in terms of what the the
different notions of of truth are that
you get. So let's start with with
classical truth. So that's usually you
would think of that as a sort of two
valued yes no boolean type of truth.
Right? Well, if we take the let's take
the two values to be um let's have a one
element set. So it's one element is
star. So there are two subsets. There's
nothing and there's the whole thing.
Okay. So there are two truth values. And
um you know we could give we could
explain the meaning of implication by
saying you know that star realizes that
implication if either star realizes the
the the conclusion or it doesn't realize
the antecedent. So that would be you
know the classical explanation of of
implication in terms
of not fi or s and the corresponding
topos is the classical you know is the
topos of sets and functions in in
classical say zlo Frank set theory with
enough
um universes.
So contrast that say with what you might
call continuous truth, right? So that's
where now the the truth values are open
subsets of the real line. Okay. Um and
uh so a real number realizes an
implication uh by definition if there's
some small number absylon. So that if
you're within obsylon of x then y has
the property that whenever it realizes
spy then it realizes sigh. Okay. So
that's a different notion of of um of
why an implication should be true. And
uh the the corresponding topos is is uh
the one you get by taking the real line
with its usual metric topology and
looking at set valued sheav on it if you
know what those are. Don't worry if you
don't. uh and um in that that's a growth
topos and uh and the uh the kind of
truth that that that you've got in there
is is as far as implication goes is is
exactly this kind of
thing. Then uh there's what you might
call cleanly realizable truth. Okay. So
now our truth values are going to be
arbitrary sets of numbers, right? And um
uh a number realizes an implication if
uh whenever you have a number that
realizes the antecedent phi, it should
be the case that the nth uh partial
recursive function in some standard
enumeration of the partial recursive
functions is defined at m and takes its
value uh realizing s. So, so to realize
this implication, you have to be a a
partial recursive function that maps
realizers of fi to realizers of sigh. So
that's really you know one in concrete
embodiment of the sort of um uh
heighting comor explanation of of the
meaning of implication in terms of of
functionality and the topos uh that's
overlying this kind of truth is exactly
Martin Highland's effective topos that
first appeared in print in in the Brower
Centenary Symposium volume in
1982 and well here in talks later today
more about uh the nature of the
effective topos and what you can do in
it. So I won't say anymore
here but
um you can see those three notions of
truth are all somewhat different looking
things. So what what do they have in
common? So they're they're all things
that arise from toposes elementary
toposes various kinds. So what what kind
of notion of truth value does a topos
have in general? Okay. Well, I can't
answer it. That's not really a very well
formulated question. But we can kind of
try and pin that down in a somewhat
boring way in terms of heighting
algebbras. Okay. So, aing algebra, you
know, is to intuitionistic logic as a
boolean algebra is to classical logic.
So, it's it's um the algebra as it were
of of truth values in general. Uh uh you
know, in terms of order theory, it's
it's a distributive latis. So you've got
meetats and joins and the meats
distribute over the joins. It's bounded.
So you have a a top element and a bottom
element and you've got um you know what
some people will call relative pseudo
complements or you know better called
heighting implications I think right
which are just the the heightings
explanation in terms of orderetic stuff
of of what implication in intuitionistic
logic means.
So um if you take some theory in
intuitionistic higher order logic so
some constants and some axioms over the
basic stuff of intuitionistic higher
order logic quotient by provability you
you get a heighting algebra of of of
sentences. So the closed formula with no
variables modulo provability uh is going
to have the structure of a heighting
algebra and equivalently the same thing
you know is true uh for toposes. So if
you take a topos E and you look at the
um uh the power object of of of of no
the list of no things. So that's like
the the the object of truth values
subobject classifier as topos theorists
call it. And if you look at the the the
the equivalent of the sentences would be
the global elements of that object in in
the topos. So this is the set of
morphisms from the terminal object into
the subobject classifier. Okay. So that
carries naturally the structure of a
heighting algebra coming from the fact
that E models intuitionistic higher
order
logic. So um the answer one answer to to
this question here is well heighting
algebbras that they're all heighting
algebbras. Okay. And I suppose a very
natural question right then is um uh
which heighting algebbras all of them.
Well, the embarrassing thing is as far
as I know, we don't know the answer to
this question, right? And so this this
is the open question I referred to at
the
beginning. I is every algebra does every
heighting algebra crop up in this way as
as the truth values of some elementary
topos. So um just one first an easy
first observation is if you're going to
answer this question you don't have to
consider all heighting algebraas you can
just consider free heighting algebbras
because um you know every heighting
algebra is a quotient by filter of of of
a free heighting algebra and in the
world of toposes there's something
called a filter power construction. So
if you have a filter of truth values,
you can form a new topos and its truth
values will be the quotient of the truth
values in the previous one by the
filter. So, so it's enough to answer
this question just for for freeing
algebbras and um I very much at the time
I I you know I don't actually know
whether the answer to this question is
yes or no now I beyond caring although I
care but I just don't know but certainly
in the 1980s I I I I thought that
probably it would be the case that the
free heighting algebra countibly many
generators to be very specific is not
the not the heighting algebra of some
topos and that it should be possible to
prove this and my strategy for proving
it is quite straightforward right so I
mean were the free hiding algebra on on
on x so x might just be the natural
numbers let's say were it of the form of
the truth values of some topos the fact
that that topos models higher order
logic means that the topos is able
inside itself to do universal and
existential quantification over things
and that has an effect on what you get
in the truth vales and it's it's not
hard to see that that um if this
freehighting algebra is of this form
then actually intutionistic
propositional logic has to satisfy the
what's now called the universal uh
uniform interpolation property and at
the time it seemed highly unlikely that
that property would would be true and so
I searched and failed to find examples
of formula in intuitionistic
propositional logic for which one of
these A or
formula couldn't possibly exist and I
wasn't able to roll on to 1992 and then
I was able to prove actually they always
do exist so that's nice right but it
doesn't answer the question all it does
is to show that this is a failed
strategy for resolving the question okay
so it doesn't resolve the question it
just shows you that you can't prove it
one way or another this way okay even
though it's a interesting result it's
nevertheless from this point of view
somewhat
disappointing what else has happened
since then to try and resolve this
question. And I think the main thing is
to do with somebody called Dto Pateraya
um who unfortunately died in 2011. So
he's no longer with us. But in
2007 he um came up with um a claim of
resolving this question in the positive.
In other words, give I give him a
heighting algebra. He constructs an
elementary topos whose truth values is
that heighting algebra. That's actually
the more interesting answer to the
question. I mean, we want to resolve the
question either way, and no is okay if
it's true, right? But it'd be better if
the answer were yes, because then we
would get a whole slew of maybe
interesting, maybe not interesting, but
certainly probably new toposes that we
didn't know about for for given
heighting algebra. So, so it would be
nice if the answer were yes. DTO claimed
the answer was yes, and it his strategy
is it kind of came in two parts. So the
first part is that he
formulated not exactly the the notion of
what um Peter Johnston and Martin
Highland and I called tripos a slightly
different notion but it's sort of one
situated in in algebraic logic. So
cylindric algebbras and things like
that. Uh so he formulated notion of a
higher order cylindric heighting algebra
or hotcher uh as he called it. um uh and
every hotcher has a height algebra of
truth values. Okay? And every hotcher
generates a topos in a way that's not
dissimilar to the way that every tripos
generates a topos if you happen to know
that kind of stuff. So all of this is
absolutely fine and okay and um not not
the same as as as as tryost to topos but
but but but not disconnected from it. Um
then the second step which is the
difficult one is that that he was
claimed that he could use Stephan uh
Stephano Gillard's construction of free
heighting algebra. So Stephano has a
paper uh in uh here in 1992 that that
presents free heighting algebbras as a a
filtered co-limit of distributive
latises basically filtering on the
implication or complexity of of of the
things in in the free heighting algebra
and DTO claimed that that he could use
that to construct a hotcher um whose um
truth values were the given free
heighting algebra but he never published
the details. And as far as I know,
people who have looked at it to try and
reconstruct what those details were
haven't been able to do it. So, as far
as I'm concerned, this is, you know, I
don't know quite how he intended to do
it, and I can't see exactly how to do
it. But that doesn't mean to say that
there isn't some way of doing it this
way. It's just that we haven't thought
of it. But maybe there's some other
completely different approach. Uh, who
knows? Uh, I'm afraid it's, as far as I
know, still open.
So um nearly the end of the talk. So I
would my only purpose in giving this
talk really apart from from sort of you
know socializing category theory um was
in the hope that somebody might be
sufficiently interested to resolve this
question for me. But I uh but over and
above that I'd say that you know what
what's the moral of my talk? Well
category theory you know uber ales as
they say. No, no. Well, um, it's
certainly a, you know, a sinqua non for
understanding how to link logic to
geometry in the sense of sheath toposes
and link it to computation uh, through
notions of of
realizability. And, you know, we've
known that for, you know, and and built
up on it over some decades in the modern
era. So, sort of, you know, post 2010 or
whatever. Um there's a a somewhat
different but related kind of thing
going on and that's that's that um
people are in you know from growth and
deonwoods have been interested in trying
to to to get a better grip on homotopy
theory of spaces maybe not all
topological spaces maybe some kind of
tame uh space and higher dimensional
category theory uh is is uh has long
been known to to to provide a sort of
combinatorial uh uh setting in which you
you can you can get to grooves with
that. But high dimensional category
theory, at least as far as I'm
concerned, is really a tough subject. So
I I I've got a a misquote here. The DS
here is Dana Scott. Okay? And I'm
misquing him because actually what he
said that sucked is just two category
theory. I remember being in a in a a
conference where where some Australian
category theorists were telling him
about some stuff and he just said, "Oh,
this sucks." Um, so if two category
theory sucks, then infinity category
theory clearly, you know, sucks to the
to to to
to the power n for any
n. I mean, some people live and breathe
it. I find it quite hard. I just kind of
have
a a kind of black spot when it comes to
things like simplicial sets and so on.
But that's just my failing. But what we
can say is actually logic and in
particular various brands of Martin Left
type theory are terribly useful kind of
going back the other way. It's not not
so much explaining logic in terms of
category theory but using the logic as a
as a language an internal language to
make it easier to talk about
highdimensional categories and and the
and the relation to to homotopy theory
and also to to to get an account of
things like univerence and so on where
where there's computational content. So
I'm thinking here of the work that Terry
Khan and his collaborators have done on
so-called cubicle type
theory. So this is a very interesting
thing but it's a story for another time.
And so um for the moment that's it.
Thank you very much for your
attention. Thank you. Thank you. Maybe
let's try to Q&amp;A without the microphone.
So speak out loud. You have to say
something. Are there questions or
commands?
I was um sort of confused in the
beginning. It seems to me that in
classical propositional logic if
something is true for all
propositions that is true for true and
yes. Yes. So that's that's this maybe it
whizzed by a bit too quickly. That's
what I was trying to indicate just on
the bottom line. Where's it gone? It'll
come. Sorry. Be there in a moment. Yeah,
here we are. This bottom line here. So
in classical logic that that there's no
problem with with defined quantifiers
because you just instantiate a true and
false and take a conjunction or a
disjunction. Exactly.
Oh, did I? Sorry. Did I do it the wrong
way around? It's always good to have a
typo in your slides, you know. So,
sorry. Yeah, perhaps you were confused
very all quantifiers are in usual
smaller.
Um, well, not in my world. Not in my
world. They're
not in my world. There's no relationship
between the two really because you don't
have you have possibly empty domains. So
true. Yeah.
Most most domains are not empty. Well,
how do you
know? No, I'm being facitious. I mean,
my attitude to things like that is a
kind of utilitarian or pragmatic one.
So, so I care about say, you know,
indigenistic logic more because it's um
the appropriate logic for doing things
in certain categories. So, so in those
categories it's not the case that you
know that objects are inhabited uh in
the sense of knowing that they have
global elements generally. So you do
have to work with with with that. Yeah.
Yeah. Other questions. I mean just on
the disjunction conjunction thing though
I mean but it is the case right that
that
um you look here that that the what what
I'm when I was talking about disjunction
conjunction it's the the the the for all
thing is built up as a disjun
disjunction of of things that you've
built up so you're building up to this
biggest thing from below and the exist
is a big conjunction of things that
you're getting coming down from above so
that that's that's that's it.
Yeah. Yeah.
Yeah. I just wanted to remark
that last September I was visiting
conference in
there I discussed with
Oh yeah. Who is in possession of the
mysterious last
Yes. But I don't think he's ever gone
around analyzing what meant to say.
Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. We we I had a we Peter
and I had a meeting with with DTO in
whenever it was 2007 and so I have notes
of the talk that he gave and it's very
frustrating because it reaches a certain
point where you think yes right right so
now we're going to do it this way. What
do you do? And I think he ran out of
time or something. So we didn't we
didn't really nail him down in the way
that we should have done. Uh yeah,
you're right though. Amoka probably does
have material that you know that could
be mined. Your conjecture has not been
forgotten. Yeah. Yeah. But it hasn't
been resolved unfortunately which is
kind of I mean I think it's a good
conjecture because unlike some
conjectures I don't think actually it's
probably in the end that hard. I think
it is resolvable. It's just that that we
need maybe a new insight or something.
But but I don't I that's a good thing
right. The bad thing is that when you do
resolve, it's not the most
earthshattering fact to know about, but
but it would still be a good thing to
know.
Do you have any idea?
So, it's a matter of studying the
freeing.
Yeah. And probably on Yeah. Yeah. So,
what would be the relationship
between uncountable?
Oh, I I don't know. Um, but that's
probably not so important. I think uh
once you I mean you can if you can
resolve this for countably many uh
variables, then you you're good, right?
Because every formula only involves
finitely many. So So that's not bad. I
think the problem is going down the
other way. So freehing algebraas on
finitely many generators. Um well,
they're all infinite apart from the one
on no generators.
So, but what
about finite heighting algebbras? Okay.
So, so that's a Stephano
Gillard's character which builds on I've
forgotten the the the man's name but I
mean it's not dissimilar to other
analyses but just rather cleaner. He he
gets the the infinite free heighting
algebra as a filter kim finite heighting
algebbras. They're all finite
distributive latis. Every finite
distributive latis is complete. Hence is
a heighting algebra. The cool thing is
can you include one in another in a way
that it preserves any existing
implications and the answer is you can.
And so you take the filtered the union
as it were of these finite distributive
latises. Each of them have got enough
implications and their implications that
exist are all being uh preserved as as
you go up the inclusions and in the
limit you get something that is not only
a distributed latis but pick any two
things and they're somewhere in the
finite chain got an implication. So then
you've got implications everywhere and
it turns out that that's doesn't you
know that's completely free and so that
that's the description of the free
heighting algebra and you could do it on
uncountably many generators it would
just be the the same sort of thing. So
somehow leveraging that fact. So every
finite distributive latice is a complete
distributive latice has a topos because
every complete heighting algebra. I mean
we know amongst toposes that complete
heighting algebra certainly have toposes
because you can do sheav on a complete
heighting algebra you get truth values
of that heighting algebra but the
filtered co-immit involved isn't a
filtered co-immit of logical functors
between toposes. So yeah, so that
doesn't you can't immediately get the
answer like that, but maybe something
like that is going to work. And that's
what he had in mind. It's just I don't
quite know how he was going to get the
uh the thing to work in the end. Yeah.
So
other questions? Yes, please.
Thanks
very loud.
I'm wondering
about what
happens
to actually counter examples.
when you assume smallness.
Yeah. I don't know. Uh maybe um yeah, on
the Yeah. So, you're suggesting sort of
let's go at the negative side a bit a
bit um more seriously. Uh that would be
worth doing. I mentioned another sorry,
not completely unrelated to that. If I
just flick back to um
here, here's a negative result. I
mentioned it. Uh where is it? Oops.
Sorry, far
too. Yes, there we are. This is an
interesting result because um we know
something about S4 versus toposes,
right? So uh uh boolean topos with a
with a distinguished um geometric
subtopos would give you a model of S4.
So this is I guess saying that that you
know amongst the boolean topos is
equipped with a with a subtopos. You
look at the truth values there. uh
they're probably um not going to be all
possible models of S4 because of this
reason that because they construct here
a specific model of S4 which is uh uh
which doesn't have uniform interpolation
and yet if it was uh the the truth
values of of a topos with a given
subspace then it would so so so that's a
negative result it's just not the
negative result that we want in general
but uh Yeah.
Um, so thanks a lot for your wonderful
talk. Uh, so it seems like you're you
have invitation of second order
proposition logic into first order
proposition logic. Intuitionistic. Yes,
that's right. Yes. And it's a bit
surprising your second order proposition
logic is undecidable. First order
proposition logic is so so I that that's
why I didn't think it could possibly be
true. Yeah. How can I match that up?
Well, yeah. I mean, uh I mean, the fact
that you have the interpretation doesn't
doesn't help you decide things in in
second door logic at all, right? Because
it's it's you know, it's an incredibly
collapsing interpretation. is a very
special I mean in the I mean from the um
duality point of view you you get that
the opposite of the category of finitely
presented heighting algebbras is
basically a a model of of first order
intuitionistic logic so it's it's is you
know the theory of heighting algebraas
has a model companion and and that
theory is a very special one so so in
that theory uh for all commutes with
disjunction right so and that's true
here with these quantifiers, right? When
you do an AP over a disjunction, it's
the disjunction of the for all. So
that's a very, you know, special
property. So, so it's it's a very it's a
very special interpretation. It's not at
all general. Yeah.
Yeah. So, I just wanted to make a
historical remark. So,
uh uniform interpolation was uh
independently discovered by
who worked on uh the problem of
embedding recursively innumerable
Margari algebbras into the Mari
algebra of piano
arithmetic. So um the so the point was
if I remember so he proved it for L's
logic. Uhhuh. So the
uh proof is very difficult to follow. He
in his paper he describes it as a fist
fight. And so it's really you take
crypty models and then you do something
then it work doesn't quite work and then
you use something else and that that
iterated five six times. So I I never
really completely understood blood proof
and I think Later
um Dominico
Zambella made a simpler version of FA's
proof in which the need for uniform
interpolation was not present but that
was because he just considered finitely
many generators and I think so FA needed
the uniform interpolation to do the
proof I see
for recursively
innumerable algebra on infinitely many
generators
and so later I had to adapt proof to
prove the result for IPC
and were you able to
using that but I couldn't because the
fist fight was too much for me and so
only when I completely said let's start
a new so I discovered
the proof that of which I found out
later that on Zavagski already have it.
Yeah. I mean, there's always a fist
fight. It seems improving, but I would
say that the the least fisty cuffs are
probably in in Sam and and
Reio's account of of the subject. You
still still have to get your sleeves
rolled up a bit, but uh yeah. Uh yeah.
Yeah.
Apparently,
yes. I mean I'll probably put them on my
web page at some point as well but yeah.
Yeah. Yes.
I just want to ask the question
about going in the positive direction.
Yeah. Do you know so some hiking algebra
are known to appear as you mentioned
like complete ones. Complete ones. Yeah.
Well obviously finite ones are complete.
And from what I know also all boolean
algebra. Yes. Certainly. Yes. Do you
know any other nice class?
Uh
um not really. Not off the top of my
head. Um I probably did. I may have
forgotten, but um yeah, I mean we don't
we don't really have a great means of
construction of different really
different sorts of writing algebas.
That's the problem. the the um yeah uh
so my my my sort of straight answer is
no I don't but uh um yeah uh
yeah I mean it's kind of irritating it's
you feel like I mean the boolean algebra
is one it works because you can um you
know you're
you every boolean algebra is a filter co
of finite boolean algebbras and and
every finite boolean algebra you can you
know is complete and you can form
sheav's
on it and uh so it's you know you get a
topos but the problem is that that that
filtered system of toposes in that case
a logical functions and so when you take
the co limit you you get a topos again
but but with heighting algebra it
wouldn't be uh logical functions and so
you wouldn't you know it's not that
simple precisely because of that so
would that be true for any locally
finite hygiene algebra so for instance
any algebra I don't think so probably uh
yeah you don't think I don't know well
I my mind has been corrupted by thinking
about unalance and and homotopy tai
theory for the last few years. So I've
forgotten a lot. I used to know quite a
lot about hiding algebraas because I got
so frustrated with trying to prove this
result and I think I probably forgotten
most of it. But uh yeah, I think the
problem with the literature is it's
actually kind of quite a bit scattered
and it's very hard to to uh nobody's
really as it were written the the uh the
the compendious account of part partly
because it's somehow slightly
unsatisfying in in what we don't know
what we do know but yeah
I think we should leave it at this and
move to the break so where you can ask
further questions let's take our Thank
you very much.