Embeddings and Completions in Partial
Combinatory Algebra
Sebastiaan Terwijn
Radboud University Nijmegen
Heytingdag
KNAW
March 14, 2025

Theories of computation
• Combinatory algebra (1924 Sch¨onﬁnkel, 1930 Curry)
• λ-calculus (1936 Church)
• Computability theory (1930s G¨odel, Church, Turing, Kleene)
▶recursive functions
▶Turing machines
▶...

Provable versus computable
• G¨odel 1931, uses recursive functions to prove result about
provability.
• Constructive mathematics, Brouwer etc.
• Heyting 1930, intuitionistic logic.
• What is relation between provability in restricted logic and
computation?
• Kleene 1945, realizability.
• Computability, provability, constructivism, all connected from
the beginning (and studied by the same people).

Partial combinatory algebra
A partial applicative structure (pas) is a set A together with a
partial application operator.
• a · b
“a applied to b.”
• We often simply write ab, and we write ab↓if this is deﬁned.
• Convention: abc means (ab)c.
• terms over A are built from elements of A, variables, and
application.
• For closed terms t and s, we write t ≃s if either both are
undeﬁned, or both are deﬁned and equal.

Partial combinatory algebra
A pas A is combinatory complete if for any term t(x1, . . . , xn, x)
there exists b ∈A such that for all a1, . . . , an, a ∈A,
(i) ba1 · · · an ↓,
(ii) ba1 · · · ana ≃t(a1, . . . , an, a).
N.B. This is the abstract analogue of the S-m-n-theorem.
A pas A is a partial combinatory algebra (pca) if it is combinatory
complete.

Partial combinatory algebra
A pas A is combinatory complete if for any term t(x1, . . . , xn, x)
there exists b ∈A such that for all a1, . . . , an, a ∈A,
(i) ba1 · · · an ↓,
(ii) ba1 · · · ana ≃t(a1, . . . , an, a).
N.B. This is the abstract analogue of the S-m-n-theorem.
A pas A is a partial combinatory algebra (pca) if it is combinatory
complete.
Theorem (Feferman 1975) A is combinatory complete iﬀthere
exist combinators k and s with
(i) kab↓and kab ≃a,
(ii) sab↓and sabc ≃ac(bc).

Examples of pcas
• Kleene’s 1st model K1: n, m ∈ω
n · m = ϕn(m)
• Kleene’s 2nd model K2: α, β ∈ωω
α · β = Φα(β)
• Scott’s graph model G: X, Y ⊆ω
X · Y =

n | ∃u(⟨n, u⟩∈X ∧Du ⊆Y )
	
Note the relation with enumeration reducibility:
Z ⩽e Y iﬀZ = X · Y for some c.e. X.
• any model M of PA gives a pca:
let ab↓= c if M |= ϕa(b) = c.

Examples of pca’s
Many more examples in the books by
Beeson, Troelstra–van Dalen, Odifreddi,
van Oosten, Longley–Normann, ...

Logic Colloquium Leeds 1997
JvO invited talk:
Partial combinatory algebras for sequential computation

Inputs as functions
Note the familiar double role of numbers n ∈ω in computability
theory: n is both an input and a function ϕn.
Other examples of this in mathematics:
• Every continuous f : R →R can be coded by a real, so every
x ∈R is both input and a partial continuous function. This
gives Kleene’s model K2.
• In algebra, if G is a group and a ∈G, then a gives a function
on G deﬁned by x 7→ax. This observation gives Cayley’s
theorem that G is isomorphic to a subgroup of the group
Sym(G) of permutations of G. However, this example does
not give a pca: No nontrivial group is a pca because no pca is
associative. (Also, no pca is ever commutative.)

Embeddings of pcas
An embedding of pcas is an injection f : A →B that preserves the
structure of application. Various possibilities:
• Consider the combinators k and s as part of the signature.
• Do not consider the combinators k and s as part of the
signature.
The diﬀerence between these is huge. Both are used in the
literature. Here we will take the second option.
• An even weaker notion: applicative morphism (Longley).

Embeddings and completions
An injection f : A →B is a weak embedding if for all a, b ∈A
A |= ab↓=⇒B |= f(a)f(b)↓= f(ab).
Notation: A ,→B.
If in addition for a speciﬁc choice of combinators k and s of A,
f(k) and f(s) serve as combinators for B, we call f a strong
embedding.
If B is total we call it a weak/strong completion of A.

Strong completions
Example K1 is strongly completable.
Question (Barendregt, Mitschke, and Scott 1974)
Does every pca have a strong completion?
Theorem (Klop 1982, Bethke 1987, Bethke, Klop, De Vrijer
1999) No.

Weak completions
What about weak completions? Since every pca has combinators k
and s, one would expect a similar answer. However:
Theorem (Engeler 1981/2021) Every pca has a weak completion.
The proof is purely syntactic.

Weak completions
Theorem (Golov-T 2023) Every countable pca weakly embeds
into K2.
Theorem (Golov-T 2023) K2 ,→G.
Corollary Every countable pca is weakly completable.
Klop’s counterexample is countable, so we have:
Corollary There exists a pca that is weakly completable, but not
strongly completable.

K2 generalized
K2 is a pca on ωω. It was introduced in Kleene-Vesley 1965.
Kκ
2 is a pca on κκ, for cardinals κ with κ<κ = κ.
To guarantee existence of such κ > ω we need some extra
set-theoretic assumptions.

Unique head normal forms
Given a choice of combinators s and k, the head normal forms
(hnfs) are all elements of the form s, k, ka, sa, and sab. Each of
these ﬁve types of hnf is called dissimilar from the other four.
A has unique hnfs if
• no two dissimilar hnfs can be equal in A,
• Barendregt’s axiom holds in A: for all a, a′, b, b′ ∈A,
sab = sa′b′ =⇒a = a′ ∧b = b′.
Theorem (Bethke, Klop, De Vrijer 1996) Every pca with unique
hnfs is strongly completable.
Theorem (T 2023) Kκ
2 has unique head normal forms, hence is
strongly completable.

Large embeddings
Theorem (T 2023) Assuming GCH, for every pca A there exists a
cardinal κ such that A weakly embeds into Kκ
2.
Since Kκ
2 has a strong completion, A has a weak completion.
We can get rid of the assumption GCH by switching to a binary
variant of Kκ
2.

The complexity of completions
Since K1 has unique hnfs, it has a completion. The resulting term
model is not decidable. Indeed, computable (total) combinatorial
algebras do not exist.
∅′ denotes the Halting Problem, and
X′ denotes the Halting Problem relative to a set X.
X is called low if X′ ⩽T ∅′.
Theorem (T 2023) There exists a strong completion A of K1 of
low Turing degree.

Complete extensions of PA
Theorem (T 2023) The following are equivalent for any set A:
• A computes a weak completion of K1,
• A computes a strong completion of K1,
• A computes a complete extension of PA.
In the case of PA degrees more is known, namely that they are
closed upwards (Solovay). We do not know whether the degrees of
(weak or strong) completions of K1 are also upwards closed.

Embeddings
Let B denote the van Oosten model. (Essentially this is K2 for
partial functions.) We have the following sequence of weak
embeddings (from Shafer-T and Golov-T):
K1 ,−→K2 ,−→B ,−→G
Question B ̸,→K2 ? G ̸,→B ?

Embeddings
Let B denote the van Oosten model. (Essentially this is K2 for
partial functions.) We have the following sequence of weak
embeddings (from Shafer-T and Golov-T):
K1 ,−→K2 ,−→B ,−→G
Question B ̸,→K2 ? G ̸,→B ?
For the eﬀective versions of these we have
K1 ,−→Keﬀ
2
,−→Beﬀ,−→E = Geﬀ
Nonembeddings: Keﬀ
2
̸,→K1, Beﬀ̸,→Keﬀ
2 , E ̸,→Keﬀ
2 .
Question E ̸,→Beﬀ?

Extensionality in pcas
A pca A is called extensional if
∀a ∈A(fa ≃ga) =⇒f = g
for all f, g ∈A.

Extensionality in pcas
A pca A is called extensional if
∀a ∈A(fa ≃ga) =⇒f = g
for all f, g ∈A.
Friedberg famously proved that the class of partial computable
functions is c.e. without repetitions. In Odifreddi it is stated that
the existence of an extensional pca follows from Friedberg’s result,
with a reference to Kreisel 1971. Indeed, Kreisel suggested this,
but he explicitly says that he did not verify this result:
“...there are two ways of treating extensionality. [The ﬁrst is proof-theoretic]
Another is to appeal to an enumeration without repetition; but I have not
stopped to verify the obvious essential point whether the axioms of BRFT are
in fact satisﬁed for such an enumeration without repetition...”

Extensionality in pcas
Suppose that ψe, e ∈ω, is a Friedberg enumeration of all unary
p.c. functions. It seems plausible that one could make this into an
extensional pca, with the intended application operator
n · m = ψn(m).
To prove that this yields a pca one has to show that there exist
combinators k and s. The statement of Friedberg’s theorem itself
is not suﬃcient to prove this. Namely, for every a there is a code
ka of the constant a function in the enumeration, but we cannot
ﬁnd such codes uniformly in a. Hence we cannot prove that we
have a combinator k satisfying kab = a for every a and b. This
obstacle, however, can be overcome by an adaptation of the proof
of Friedberg’s result. However, for the combinator s no such
adaptation is possible.

Extensionality in pcas
Theorem (T 2020)
(i) There exists an extensional pas on the set of all partial
computable unary functions, containing a combinator k.
(ii) There exists no such a pas with the combinator s.
(iii) There does not exist an extensional pca on the set of all p.c.
functions (with application the intended one)
Despite the failure of this, extensional pcas do exist, as was proven
by Bethke and Klop 1996. This existence gives another proof that
there exist pcas without a total extension.
